Welcome to the five paragraph essay
format,
and the purpose
of this video lecture
and its accompanying text lecture
is to explain to you how to structure
your essays for this course. All the
essay are five paragraphs, which is the department standard, and
it's the same thing we use for the final
examination.
Remember the final examination's worth
thirty three percent of your final
course grade,
so it's important that you get a handle
on the five paragraph essay format as
soon as possible.
And again,
it's what you should use in all the
essays for this course.
First of all, we're dealing with three
paragraph types: the introductory
paragraph,
the body paragraphs, and a conclusion
paragraph, so let's begin with the
introductory paragraph.
Just like the name, "introductory," it
introduces
the essay topic to your readers.
Let's say, for example, that we're talking
about a comparison contrast essay;
none of the comparing
and contrasting
should go on in the introductory
paragraph. That's not its job.
It should simply introduce the topic
through sentences that
narrow and narrow the topic until
finally we get to the thesis statement.
As a silly visual aid, think of an
upside-down pizza slice or an
upside-down triangle.
That would represent the structure of
the introductory paragraph. . . sort of. . . you
know... like this
(If I can get that straight)
What happens is. . .let's say, for instance, I
was writing a comparison contrast essay on
city living
verses
country living. That's not one of the topics
that you have available for your
comparison contrast essay, but for the
sake of an example,
let's say it was city living vs country
living.
What I might do in a case like
that is I might
open it up. . .that essay, meaning the
introductory paragraph, with a
beginning sentence that made some
statement about how the United States is
a very culturally diverse society.
I would move on to a sentence that
discusses the fact that
people in the United States
have very different lifestyles. I might, then, have a third sentence where I
suggest something about how
everyone's professional lives, their social lives,  and their private lives
are different.
And then, i would bring up the idea of
city and country living.
The following sentence, which would be
the final sentence. . . I would then
have my thesis statement. Everything
leads up to the thesis statement as the
final sentence
of the introductory paragraph.
Remember that for all your essays,
the thesis statement must be the final
sentence of your introductory paragraph.
So do you see what happened there?
Each sentence got progressively
narrower. I started off rather broadly:
the U.S. is a culturally diverse
society. . .
We all have different lifestyles (iIve
narrowed it to lifestyles), then i said
something about professional,
social, and private lives (a little more
narrow now).
Finally, I got to the topic of city and
country living,
and i finished with the thesis statement, which is
even more narrow.
and the example that i've given before
is the purpose of this essay is to
explain
the similarities and differences between
city and country living the purpose of
this essay is to compare and contrast
city and country living.
So that's the job of an introductory
paragraph; it simply introduces your
topic to your readers
and finishes with
the thesis statement.
No comparing or contrasting went on there.
Now, if it was an argumentative essay,
well, it would be the same thing,
but we would finish with a little bit of a different thesis, and I
could talk about that,
and i will,
in a future
video on some of the
argumentative-essay-assignment prompts.
Okay. . .
next, though, we should talk about the
body paragraphs, so in terms of structure
one introductory paragraph at the
beginning. . .
at the end, a conclusion paragraph. . .
in the middle, you have three body
paragraphs.
So
the three body paragraphs: that's where
the business of comparing and contrasting
takes place.
If it were an argumentative essay, that's
where the arguing would take place:
in those three paragraphs. Now, in a
comparison contrast essay, for example,
you get to do all your comparisons and
contrasts:
the way in which city living is
different
from country living. . . the way city
living is similar
to country living,
and so that's where the comparisons and
contrast would take place.
In an argumentative paper, that's where you
would be advancing your argumentative
points to persuade us over to your point
of view.
Now, the conclusion paragraph:
Sometimes students have trouble with
conclusion paragraphs. I'll give you one
very simple formula for a
conclusion paragraph that works.
Conceivably, you would have written
the first four paragraphs already,
so look back, and look at what you've
written.
Choose one key point
from each of the previous paragraphs,
and you restate it,
but in completely different wording,
and then you can revisit your thesis as
well, and restate that again.
Right there, that suggests five sentences,
and so if you're someone that has a
little bit of difficulty making
the conclusion paragraph long enough,
follow that formula you'll end up with
at least a five sentence conclusion
paragraph.
Well, I hope this helps,
and don't forget to review all the
lectures, and in particular,
Lecture Two. Always pay very, very close
attention to Lecture Two.
Again, I hope this is helpful. Thank you.